## Analysis and Prediction Modelling of College Student Earning Potential
### Team Members
Jagatha Easwaramoorthy<br>
Vijaya Tatinneni<br>
Abdullah Alfai<br>
Alex Leontiev
### Project Description
<p>We used the data set described below to explore the following questions/areas:

1. What are the prominent features that determine earning potential for graduating students?
2. Is there a set of features that can be used to predict the earning potential?
3. What, if any, natural groupings can be found in the set of features explored in the above questions?
<p>Using Machine Learning (ML) techniques, we scrutinized the relationship between various features—demographic, economic and others like major, tuition—and their impact to earning 10 years post graduation date.

### Approach
<p>The following Machine Learning techniques were employed in various analyses:

1. Decision Tree and PCA were used for feature selection.
2. Multi-variate regression analysis was trained on the top ten dominant features driving post graduate income.
3. Cluster analysis was applied to identify natural grouping among the top three features used in regression analysis.
<p>In addition, we made use of the following:

* Python and Pnadas for data munging.
* Matplotlib for data visualization.
* HTML/CSS/Bootstrap and Flask for the project web page.

### Findings & Observations
<p>The following findings correspond to the three questions stipulated earlier.

1.	Decision Tree and PCA produced similar ordering of the top 10 features that affect student earning. A hybrid ordering based on the rankings generated by the two models is: SAT score, tuition, household income, age at entry time, race, gender. <br>
Note: race was represented by four columns, one for each of Asian, Black, Hispanic and White. These four tended to group together in various ranking lists, which we interpreted as race being one overall feature. Specific to gender, we picked the column containing the percentage of female student population and noticed a negative relationship with earning—evidence of gender pay-gap.
2.	The following set of features delivered 60% accuracy in predicting earning—in order of weight: SAT score, tuition, age at entry time, household income.<br>
We observed significant positive correlation between age at college entry and earning. It may advisable to allow ambivalent high school graduates take a year or two to make up their minds and experience life without a college degree. 
3.	The natural groupings found via KMeans cluster analysis using the top three features—SAT, tuition, household income—provided no definitive insights. <br>
Note: we chose three features so a 3 dimensional plot could be visualized. Plotting of all data viewed from a variety of angles seemed to indicate 3 clusters; the model indicated 4 groupings, which is reasonably close.
<p>While conducting various analyses, an unexpected observation occurred: We noted that there is no significant relationship between various degree majors and earning; surely STEM degree graduates would command higher salaries. Not so simple; our data relate only to undergraduate degrees; all high-tech jobs require specialized and advanced degrees. A note to parents who encourage their children for paths in science and technology: an undergraduate degree is only the beginning.

### Main Data Set
<p>US Department of Education: https://collegescorecard.ed.gov/data/ 
<p>The primary purpose of these data are to develop score cards (ranking) that can be used to evaluate academic institutions; for example see: https://www.brookings.edu/research/using-earnings-data-to-rank-colleges-a-value-added-approach-updated-with-college-scorecard-data/. 
